Well, hello everyone.
Today I'm going to talk about extreme
exoplanets. Just a few examples that
have crossed my radar
and that I thought were very, very
interesting.
I'm going to start with KELT, the
Kilodegree
Extremely Little Telescope. You've got
to have a great acronym in this game.
Kilodegree because it's going to cover a
thousand square degrees
and
extremely little because it is in fact
shown in the picture there. It's a
glorified camera lens
in a fully robotic observatory, in fact
two of them. One in the lovely dry
conditions of Arizona and one down in
the southern hemisphere at Cape Town.
And it's run by the Ohio State
University and set up in order to look
for transiting exoplanets where planets
that orbit other stars
cross in front of the light from the
star, cross our line of sight from our
solar system out to them and block part
of the light of the star. So, we see a
slight drop in the brightness of the
star as the planet moves across. And you
don't need a particularly massive
telescope, you just need good observing
conditions with a nice stable sky and so
KELT is well set up for doing all of
that.
And as with all of these
surveys, it produces a catalog and
things get numbered in the catalog. And
the first one I want to look at is
KELT-9.
And the ninth object that it focused its
attention on. Now, this is a star
an A-type star, so two grades hotter
and more massive than our sun. Our sun
is G-type. Hotter than that is F. Go up
again and you get to A-type. The
letters, once upon a time, made sense
and were in alphabetical order for the
classes, but
that was based purely on
the spectra of the stars and was a
somewhat arbitrary classification. Now,
we've reordered them so that they're in
order of temperature.
And this star, 2.4 times the mass of our
sun,
makes
a significant increase in the amount of
energy that it puts out. If you increase
the mass of a star, it burns
disproportionately faster because the
extra gravity crushes the material in
the core to an even higher density,
pressure, and temperature, and so the
fusion rate goes up roughly with the
fourth power of the temperature.
So, 2 and 1/2 times the mass, and the
temperature is all the way up to 10,000
K.
Our sun is at 5,800 K.
So, nearly double the surface
temperature, but a lot hotter in the
core.
And it's in the constellation of Cygnus.
This is an area that's been very well
surveyed by space telescopes such as
Kepler.
Up there, easily observed from most
locations on the Earth.
And we can measure the distance, and
it's 670 light-years away. So, not
really in our backyard.
And the planet that was discovered in
is orbiting incredibly close to the
star.
It takes just 1 and 1/2 days for this
planet to go
round its orbit once.
And the distance there's 0.034
astronomical units.
So,
an astronomical unit is the Earth-Sun
distance.
So, the Earth would be one, Venus is at
0.7,
Mercury at 0.4.
This is 0.0
34. So, it's just less than um 1/10 of
the distance that Mercury is from our
Sun. And remember, this is a larger,
hotter star pouring out vast amounts of
energy. So, this is going to be awfully
uncomfortable and uh does definitely
classifies as an extreme exoplanet.
It's also pretty big. It's 2.2 times the
mass of Jupiter, so a super-Jupiter gas
giant planet, presumably.
Three times the radius, so although the
mass is doubled, the volume is going to
be nine times. Sorry, no, not nine
times, 27 times. 3 * 3 * 3, 27 times the
volume. And that's why the density is so
low at less than half a gram per cubic
centimeter, and uh that is very low
indeed. Water would be one, so this is a
very low-density object indeed.
Presumably inflated by the sheer heat of
the radiation from the star.
Now, in addition to being so close, so
hot, and so massive, there is another
particularly weird thing about KELT-9b,
which is that it seems to be in a polar
orbit.
Most planets orbit around the equatorial
plane of their stars. Stars spins, has a
north and a south pole, and an equator.
Our Sun does that, and Jupiter goes
pretty much round the equator, um as do
most of the other planets, there or
thereabouts.
It's very, very unusual to find an
object orbiting up over the poles in a a
full polar orbit, but that seems to be
what has been
created here. So, it's obviously
possible,
and we're speculating really that it's
such a highly unusual situation that it
was probably prompted by some sort of
violent impact, collision, merger event
in the history of this stellar system,
the planet being hurled into this really
strange orbit.
With it being that close to the star, it
is in a full tidal lock, with one face
of the planet always pointing towards
the star. This happens the closer you go
to a large object like a giant star like
this one, a very massive object,
the stronger the force of gravity gets,
but it gets stronger
according to the cube of the
distance, the inverse cube. So, if the
tidal effect
from one side of the planet to the other
goes up in a cubic relationship. The
force of gravity between the object and
the star is still in the the ordinary
one over r squared relationship, but the
difference between the inside edge and
the outside edge of the planet goes with
the cube. And so, the degree to which
tidal pull of the star is able to
stretch this object and
distort it and result in one face almost
entirely pointing towards the star, as
has happened with our moon orbiting the
Earth. The Earth's gravity has forced
the moon into a tidal lock.
And so, all that heat is hitting just
one side of the planet, and that side of
the planet is glowing at over 4,000
degrees. Now, that's the temperature of
a fairly modest K-type orange star, in
fact.
But, it's not because the heat is being
generated internal to the planet. It's
just the day side temperature is as hot
as the surface of an orange star. Quite
incredible.
Now, all that heat
and the stellar wind pouring off this
powerful A-type star
is boiling material away from the planet
at a ferocious rate,
and it's creating a comet-like tail.
Here, you can see in the animation, the
star rotating on its axis,
and the planet going around in a polar
orbit, leaving a tail behind. And this
is very
fascinating
video to watch.
And
the heat and the radiation is so
powerful that it is
ripping apart all the light, water, and
carbon dioxide molecules, methane, all
of those sorts of uh
low-mass elements
are being completely ripped out of any
molecules, and just atomized. And the
light elements, such as hydrogen, and
are then immediately being boiled off to
space, forming this enormous plume, this
comet-like tail. 100,000 tons of it
every single second is being removed
from the planet by the blast of the
stellar wind.
Now, with all those light and volatile
materials gone,
or certainly being removed at a an
extreme rate, what's left in the
atmosphere is the heavier elements, the
non-volatile materials.
And that is mostly things like metals.
So, the atmosphere of KELT-9b seems to
consist of metal vapor.
Vaporized metals that have been heated,
melted, and then turned into vapor.
So, we can detect things in the
atmosphere uh um as uh pure metallic
elements, particularly iron and
titanium. Uh they have very strong
spectral lines um and are relatively
easy to detect. They're also very common
elements. So, it seems to be that that
is what this extreme planet is uh able
to retain under its gravity. All the
lightweight materials are gone.
So, that's KELT-9b,
a pretty hellish sort of world in an
incredibly tight um very strange orbit,
orbiting around the poles every 1 and
1/2 days, and being blasted to pieces.
Um I haven't seen a calculation as to
how much uh it's going to lose over time
and how long it's going to last with
this 100,000 t
a second mass loss rate, but uh it's a
very big massive planet, so it's going
to be billions of years, I'm sure.
Moving on, then,
we have a little look at the WASP
camera system. It's a robotic telescope
composed of fairly ordinary long-lens
cameras. You can see, I think there are
eight of them in an array here, in
pairs, all linked in into a
uh little observatory parked on the top
uh in of the mountain in the Canary
Islands and remotely operable so that
the roof can be opened as long as the
weather system is saying that it's all
good and the observations are entirely
uh controlled from elsewhere.
And WASP has been doing some fantastic
scanning of the sky, again looking for
the transits of planets, following up on
the observations that Kepler did, the
Kepler space telescope, uh looking for
the dimming of starlight as planets pass
across our line of sight.
And one of them is WASP-76.
This is a yellow star, somewhat more
similar to our sun. It's 1 and 1/2 times
the mass and 1.75 times the diameter.
So, again, somewhat puffed up. If you
can work out what 1.75 cubed is, you can
see that that is a considerably larger
number than the
50% extra mass. So, this is a relatively
distended object. And
yellow because it's beginning to cool.
So, it's beginning to age and turn into
a uh giant star phase. It's not
got to being a red giant yet, but it's
heading that way as the uh fuel supply
deep in the core runs out and the
nuclear fusion burning has to progress
outwards through shells in the star.
Uh that tends to increase the radiation
effect, pushing outwards on the
overlying material and puff the star up.
So, this one again, stretched over 600
light years away from us, but in the
constellation of Pisces this time, uh
illustrated in the little map down the
bottom right.
And inevitably, it has an extreme
exoplanet, WASP-76b.
This is
in a 1.8-day
long orbit, slightly closer than
KELT-9b. That was 0.034,
this is 0.033
astronomical units.
So, again, one less than a tenth
the distance that Mercury is from our
sun, and whizzing around in 1.8 days.
Takes a little bit longer than KELT-9b
does, despite the similarity of the
uh orbital
uh distance there. And that's because
the star in the center has less mass,
and that factors into Kepler's laws of
planetary motion, of course. And it's
the force of gravity that controls the
orbital velocity to remain in a
particular location.
So, this one is just a little bit lower
in mass than Jupiter, 92% of the mass,
but 1.8 times the radius. And again,
it's puffed up and inflated because at
this very close
distance into the star, the temperatures
are
extreme. 2,400°
C on the day side, and cooling to 1,400°
C, if you can call that cool,
um on the night side. So,
substantial difference of a thousand
degrees across the two hemispheres of
the planet there.
And that high temperature is what is
bringing the uh
expansion,
the reduction in density, the sort of
puffing up of the planet up to this size
given its mass.
Now, this is not as hot as KELT-9b. That
was 4,000 K.
So, K and C,
well, they only differ by 273, don't
they? So, we're significantly cooler.
And as a result, we haven't got a
comet-like tail. We're not losing all
the hydrogen and the helium from the
atmosphere, and there is a substantial
envelope of that at quite high
temperatures surrounding the planet.
The Hubble Space Telescope got in on the
act to follow up after the discovery by
WASP, and it found that the atmosphere
contains things like titanium oxide,
often used as the white pigment in
paint, and then ionized metals, lithium,
sodium, magnesium, calcium, even
manganese, potassium, and iron detected
as ionized
metal vapor in the atmosphere there. Um
and even the heavy metal barium that was
found and added to the list of
atmospheric contents uh just a few years
ago in 2022.
Now, that 1,000° difference between the
day and night side means that we have
some very, very extreme weather on this
uh planet.
It rains iron. The iron is
vaporized on the day side by the high
temperature, but on the night side of
the planet, 1,000° lower, the iron vapor
condenses, and it rains liquid iron down
through the atmosphere. So, absolutely
an extreme environment.
Another interesting observation made by
another space telescope called CHEOPS,
which is out there studying exoplanets
as well,
was a detection of what we think is a
glory.
And it's There's an artist's
illustration of what the glory might
look like
down at the bottom right, and a real
photograph of a glory being created on
the cloud deck by the sun
casting the glory down onto the top of
the clouds
where an airliner is flying along, and
it's the sunlight passing the airliner,
and
then striking the cloud,
an effect
that I have definitely seen myself on a
couple of occasions from high-flying
airliners.
Very strange thing indeed, a bit like a
rainbow, only this one is
down sun, away towards where your shadow
is,
um and tends to be completely circular
under these circumstances.
Anyway, the CHEOPS satellite seems to
indicate a shiny spot
on the sunward surface of this planet,
um and it may well be rather similar to
a glory. Now, that's quite strange.
And it's
pointing towards an interesting
possibility, which is that this planet
WASP-76b
has its own moon, 76b b.
If that were the case, that would be one
of the earliest detections of an
exomoon, even though it's rather an
indirect detection.
And it could be that it's evaporation of
material from the moon that is leading
to the
detections that KEOPS is making
that make it appear that we have a
glory. This may be more due to material
being
blasted by the heat off the small moon.
So, definitely more to learn about this
one.
And finally for this little tour,
I had to include this one.
PSR J2322-2650b
is a planet found by
the James Webb Space Telescope to be
orbiting a dead star,
a neutron star, in fact a rotating
neutron star emitting beams of radiation
along its spin axis as jets. And if
those jets come our way, they create a
blast of radio waves. And so, the
original detection of this and the
catalog number PSR
is because this is a pulsar.
It's spinning around sending pulses of
radio waves our way.
And JWST has found that this dead core
of a star, this neutron star that's
spinning around, has a planet that is in
orbit round it. Now, this is a
Jupiter-sized planet, and the suggestion
is that it probably was present before
the star died and exploded in a
supernova leaving behind the dead
remnant, the rotating neutron star, the
pulsar.
And that the planet managed to ride out
the supernova explosion. Uh but it's
possible, of course, that it re-accreted
afterwards from material in the um
vicinity of the star that had been
ejected during explosion. We're not
entirely sure, and there are competing
theories on this one.
Uh but what we do think is happening is
that the radiation in the rotating jets
is not doing the planet any good at all.
They are sweeping periodically over the
planet and blasting its surface, eroding
material from it at an extreme rate. So,
how long this planet will be around
again would make a very interesting
subject to dig right into
as and when we get more data on it.
So, that's it for this one. Just some
rather interesting and very peculiar
exoplanets for you. Thanks very much for
listening, and I hope you've enjoyed
that one, and you get to listen to some
of my other videos as well. Bye for now.